imagine a world in which you see numbers
and letters as colored
even though they're printed in black in
which music or voices trigger a swirl of
moving colored shapes
in which words and names fill your mouth
with unusual flavors
jail tastes like cold hard bacon while
derek
tastes like earwax welcome to
synesthesia
the neurological phenomenon that couples
two or more senses in four percent of
the population
a synesthete might not only hear my
voice but also see it
taste it or feel it as a physical touch
sharing the same root with anesthesia
meaning no sensation
syn esthesia means join sensation having
one type
such as colored hearing gives you a
fifty percent chance of having a second
third or fourth type
one in ninety among us experience
graphemes the written elements of
language like letters numerals and
punctuation marks
as saturated with color some even have
gender or personality
for gale three is athletic and sporty
nine is a vain elitist girl by contrast
the sound units of language or phonemes
trigger synesthetic tastes
for james college tastes like sausage as
does
message in similar words with the edge
ending
synesthesia is a trait like having blue
eyes rather than a disorder
because there's nothing wrong in fact
all the extra hooks endow synesthetes
with superior memories
for example a girl runs into someone she
met long ago
let's see she had a green name deezer
green
deborah darby dorothy denise yes her
name is
denise once established in childhood
pairings remain fixed for life
synaesthetes inherit a biological
propensity for hyperconnecting brain
neurons
but then must be exposed to cultural
artifacts such as calendars food names
and alphabets
the amazing thing is that a single
nucleotide change in the sequence of
one's dna
alters perception in this way
synesthesia provides a path to
understanding subjective differences
how two people can see the same thing
differently
take sean who prefers blue tasting food
such as milk oranges and spinach
the gene heightens normally occurring
connections between the taste area in
his frontal lobe
and the color area further back but
suppose in someone else that the gene
acted in non-sensory areas
you'd then have the ability to link
seemingly unrelated things
which is the definition of metaphor
seeing the similar
in the dissimilar not surprisingly
synesthesia is more common in artists
who excel at making metaphors
like novelis vladimir nabakov painter
david hockney
and composers billy joel and lady gaga
but why do the rest of us
non-synesthetes understand metaphors
like
sharp cheese or sweet person it so
happens that sight sound and movement
already map to one another so closely
that even bad ventriloquists convince us
that the dummy is talking
movies like lloyds convince us that the
sound is coming from the actors mouths
rather than surrounding speakers so in
ridley we're all sinists
outwardly unaware of the perceptual
couplings happening all the time
crosstalk in the brain is the rule not
the exception
and that sounds like a sweet deal to me
you